orbital velocity desired and velocity
from the earth we will show how to
calculate the velocity desired for
particular orbit and the Delta V that we
achieve from the Earth's rotation
Isaac Newton calculated the velocity
required to achieve circuit orbit using
his cannonball thought experiment so
here we have a picture of the earth with
a cannon on on top of a mountain and it
shoots a projectile at some low velocity
and it goes and hits the earth at Point
a it falls towards the earth but it
travels off to the right as it's doing
that with a little higher velocity the
Cannonball we're assuming no drag by the
way travels along to the right and gets
a little further to point-b before
hitting the earth and then in trajectory
C we see that what happens is the
Cannonball is going off to the right and
is falling but as it's falling towards
the Earth the earth is also more or less
falling away the curvature of the earth
is dropping as well and in the circular
orbit these two curvatures are parallel
so that although it's falling towards
the earth it has enough speed
horizontally to start off with such that
it never actually hits the earth if the
Cannonball had even higher velocity
instead of falling towards the Earth at
the same rate of the curvature there
such that it was a circular orbit it
would actually rise above and end up in
this elliptic orbit let's go ahead and
take Newton's cannonball thought
experiment a little further and and
calculate the circular orbit velocity
that you need so here we have a little
circle representing the earth and a
cannon firing a cannonball and we have
this little dashed line and here's the
ball and we have this height
that it falls and this downrange
distance X and using the falling body
equations we know that H is one-half GT
squared that's how far it drops and the
four velocity the X distance for
velocity V is V times T now let's look
at the curvature of the earth
so here we have the radius of the earth
and when the cannonball is over here at
a distance H and we've gone through this
angle theta so here's the Greek letter
theta which is written th ETA it's just
a circle with a line through it a
horizontal line we have the height is R
- R projected through cosine theta
that's this distance so that we subtract
off that distance to get the height or
the drop distance and then X is found by
R times sine theta so that's this
distance now we're going to assume that
theta is a very small angle so we can
use this expansion these are trig
expansions cosine of theta is
approximately 1 minus 1/2 theta squared
plus other terms but for very small
theta we just carry these first two
terms the 1 and the minus 1/2 theta
squared sine theta is approximately
equal to theta and of course this is in
radians and so now we can write a
simplified equation for H because we
have R - R cosine theta and we subtract
R times 1 it gets rid of the first R and
then we subtract a negative 1/2 theta
square with r we just have positive R
theta squared over 2 x is approximately
R times theta using the sine expansion
and therefore theta is x over R and now
we can write we can put in this equation
we can plug in the value for theta which
is x over R we square that so we have x
over R squared R and then 2 is
downstairs
our
squared downstairs cancels one of the
cancels the are upstairs we have an are
downstairs so if x squared over to our
now we've got these two equations so we
can use x equals h equals x squared over
two R and H equals one-half GT squared
so we have this on the right on the Left
I've plugged in for X VT so we square
that v squared T squared upstairs and
then downstairs to our notice that we
can cancel the one half T squared on
both sides so this goes out and this and
this goes out and this so we have V
squared over R equals G and then we get
V equals the square root of G R so
that's our formula for what's called the
circular speed or circular velocity so
let's see how this works out with
numbers
we'll use the altitude that the Saturn 5
went 276 kilometers and the radius the
earth will use 6278 kilometers so we're
gonna use our as being a 65 54
kilometers our six point five five four
times 10 to the 6 meters now in our G
we're going to now this is not the
standard freefall G that we defined in
other presentations this is the
gravitational acceleration as a function
of the are you happen to be at now if we
take the value at sea level or at the
equator 9.8 meters per second squared at
a radius of 6378 as we go up from that
altitude we will lose acceleration by
this R squared R at Earth squared over R
at orbit squared so this is a this is
basically because of Newton's law that
gravity goes with GMM over R squared so
this is how you get the G at different
altitudes or a different radii I should
say and it's only nine point two eight
meters per second squared compared to
nine point eight at the equator so it's
a little bit less when you're up at 176
kilometers